# **Database Systems Overview Homework** #
----------
## *1. What database models do you know?* ##
**Logical data models for databases:**

- Hierarchical database model
- Network model
- Relational model
- Entity–relationship model
- Enhanced entity–relationship model
- Object model
- Document model
- Entity–attribute–value model
- Star schema

**Physical data models include:**

- Inverted index
- Flat file

----------
## *2. Which are the main functions performed by a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)?* ##
**A relational database management system (RDBMS)** is a database management system (DBMS) that is based on the relational model.

**RDBMS systems typically implement:**

- Creating / altering / deleting tables and relationships between them (database schema)
- Adding, changing, deleting, searching and retrieving of data stored in the tables
- Support for the SQL language
- Transaction management (optional)

----------
## *3. Define what is "table" in database terms.* ##
**A table is a collection of related data held in a structured format within a database. It consists of fields (columns), and rows.**

In relational databases and flat file databases, a table is a set of data elements (values) using a model of vertical columns (identifiable by name) and horizontal rows, the cell being the unit where a row and column intersect. A table has a specified number of columns, but can have any number of rows. Each row is identified by one or more values appearing in a particular column subset. The columns subset which uniquely identifies a row is called the primary key.

"Table" is another term for "relation".

----------
## *4. Explain the difference between a primary and a foreign key.* ##
**Primary Key**
The primary key of a relational table uniquely identifies each record in the table. It can either be a normal attribute that is guaranteed to be unique (such as Social Security Number in a table with no more than one record per person) or it can be generated by the DBMS (such as a globally unique identifier, or GUID, in Microsoft SQL Server). Primary keys may consist of a single attribute or multiple attributes in combination.

**Foreign Key**
In context of relational databases, a foreign key is a field (or collection of fields) in one table that uniquely identifies a row of another table. In simpler words, the foreign key is defined in a second table, but it refers to the primary key in the first table. The table containing the foreign key is called the child table, and the table containing the candidate key is called the referenced or parent table.

----------
## *5. Explain the different kinds of relationships between tables in relational databases.* ##
**There are 3 types of table relationships:**

1. **One-to-one relationships:** In a one-to-one relationship, each row in one database table is linked to one and only one other row in another table. In a one-to-one relationship between Table A and Table B, each row in Table A is linked to another row in Table B. The number of rows in Table A must equal the number of rows in Table B.
2. **One-to-many relationships:** In a one-to-many relationship, each row in the related to table can be related to many rows in the relating table. This effectively save storage as the related record does not need to be stored multiple times in the relating table. For example, all the customers belonging to a business is stored in a customer table while all the customer invoices are stored in an invoice table. Each customer can have many invoices but each invoice can only be generated for a single customer.
3. **Many-to-many relationships:** In a many-to-many relationship, one or more rows in a table can be related to 0, 1 or many rows in another table. A mapping table is required in order to implement such a relationship. For example, all the customers belonging to a bank is stored in a customer table while all the bank's products are stored in a product table. Each customer can have many products and each product can be assigned to many customers.

----------
## *6. When is a certain database schema normalized? What are the advantages of normalized databases?* ##
Database normalization is the process of organizing the columns (attributes) and tables (relations) of a relational database to minimize data redundancy.

Normalization involves decomposing a table into less redundant (and smaller) tables without losing information; defining foreign keys in the old table referencing the primary keys of the new ones. The objective is to isolate data so that additions, deletions, and modifications of an attribute can be made in just one table and then propagated through the rest of the database using the defined foreign keys.

----------
## *7. What are database integrity constraints and when are they used?* ##
Constraints are the rules enforced on data columns on table. These are used to limit the type of data that can go into a table. This ensures the accuracy and reliability of the data in the database.

Constraints could be column level or table level. Column level constraints are applied only to one column, whereas table level constraints are applied to the whole table.

Commonly used constraints available in SQL:

- **NOT NULL Constraint:** Ensures that a column cannot have NULL value.
- **DEFAULT Constraint:** Provides a default value for a column when none is specified.
- **UNIQUE Constraint:** Ensures that all values in a column are different.
- **PRIMARY Key:** Uniquely identifies each rows/records in a database table.
- **FOREIGN Key:** Uniquely identifies a rows/records in another database table.
- **CHECK Constraint:** The CHECK constraint ensures that all values in a column satisfy certain conditions.

Constraints can be specified when a table is created with the CREATE TABLE statement or you can use ALTER TABLE statement to create constraints even after the table is created.

----------
## *8. Point out the pros and cons of using indexes in a database.* ##
Index is a physical structure contains pointers to the data.
The users cannot see the indexes, they are just used to speed up queries. Effective indexes are one of the best ways to improve performance in a database application.

**The advantages of indexes are as follows:**

- Their use in queries usually results in much better performance.
- They make it possible to quickly retrieve (fetch) data.
- They can be used for sorting. A post-fetch-sort operation can be eliminated.
- Unique indexes guarantee uniquely identifiable records in the database.

**The disadvantages of indexes are as follows:**

- They decrease performance on inserts, updates, and deletes.
- They take up space (this increases with the number of fields used and the length of the fields).
- Some databases will monocase values in fields that are indexed.

----------
## *9. What's the main purpose of the SQL language?* ##
**SQL (Structured Query Language)** is a special-purpose programming language designed for managing data held in a relational database management system (RDBMS), or for stream processing in a relational data stream management system (RDSMS).

## *10. What are transactions used for? Give an example.* ##
A transaction symbolizes a unit of work performed within a database management system (or similar system) against a database, and treated in a coherent and reliable way independent of other transactions. A transaction generally represents any change in database. Transactions in a database environment have two main purposes:

1. To provide reliable units of work that allow correct recovery from failures and keep a database consistent even in cases of system failure, when execution stops (completely or partially) and many operations upon a database remain uncompleted, with unclear status.
2. To provide isolation between programs accessing a database concurrently. If this isolation is not provided, the programs' outcomes are possibly erroneous.

A database transaction, by definition, must be atomic, consistent, isolated and durable. Database practitioners often refer to these properties of database transactions using the acronym ACID.

**A simple explanation:** 

You need to transfer 100 bucks from account A to account B. You can either do:

    accountA -= 100;
    accountB += 100;
or

    accountB += 100;
    accountA -= 100;
If something goes wrong between the first and the second operation in the pair you have a problem - either 100 bucks have disappeared or they have appeared out of nowhere.

A transaction is a mechanism that allows you to mark a group of operations and execute them in such a way thet either they all execute (commit) or the system state will be as if they have not started to execute at all (rollback).

    beginTransaction;
    accountB += 100;
    accountA -= 100;
    commitTransaction;
will either transfer 100 bucks or leave both account in the initial state.

----------
## *11. What is a NoSQL database?* ##
A **NoSQL** (originally referring to "non SQL" or "non relational") **database** provides a mechanism for storage and retrieval of data that is modeled in means other than the tabular relations used in relational databases.

**NoSQL Database key characteristics:**

- Use document-based model (non-relational)
- Schema-free document storage
- Support CRUD operations(create, read, update, delete)
- Support indexing and querying
- Support concurrency and transactions
- Highly optimized for append / retrieve
- Great performance and scalability

----------
## *12. Explain the classical non-relational data models.* ##
Motivations for this approach include: simplicity of design, simpler "horizontal" scaling to clusters of machines, which is a problem for relational databases, and finer control over availability. The data structures used by NoSQL databases (e.g. key-value, graph, or document) differ slightly from those used by default in relational databases, making some operations faster in NoSQL and others faster in relational databases. 

----------
## *13. Give few examples of NoSQL databases and their pros and cons.* ##
**NoSQL Database Types:**

- **Document databases** pair each key with a complex data structure known as a document. Documents can contain many different key-value pairs, or key-array pairs, or even nested documents. Documents are addressed in the database via a unique key that represents that document. One of the other defining characteristics of a document-oriented database is that in addition to the key lookup performed by a key-value store, the database offers an API or query language that retrieves documents based on their contents. Examples of document databases are CouchDB and MongoDB.
- **Graph stores** are designed for data whose relations are well represented as a graph (elements interconnected with an undetermined number of relations between them). They are used to store information about networks, such as social connections. Graph stores include IBM DB2, Neo4J and OrientDB.
- **Key-value stores** are the simplest NoSQL databases. Every single item in the database is stored as an attribute name (or "key"), together with its value. Some key-value stores, such as Redis, allow each value to have a type, such as "integer", which adds functionality. Examples of key-value stores are Riak, Voldemort, Oracle NoSQL Database, Dynamo.
- **Wide-column stores** such as Cassandra and HBase are optimized for queries over large datasets, and store columns of data together, instead of rows.