***************************************************************************************************
Java is a programming language originally developed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems and
released in 1995 as a core component of Sun Microsystems' Java platform. The language derives much
of its syntax from C  and C++  but has a simpler object model and fewer low-level facilities. Java
applications are typically compiled to bytecode (class file ) that can run on any Java Virtual 
Machine (JVM) regardless of computer architecture. Java is a general-purpose, concurrent, class-
based, object-oriented language that is specifically designed to have as few implementation 
dependencies as possible. It is intended to let application developers "write once, run anywhere".
Java is currently one of the most popular programming languages in use, and is widely used from 
application software to web applications.
C# and Java are actually quite similar, from an application developer's perspective. The major 
similarities of these languages are all objects are references; garbage collection; both C# and 
Java are type-safe languages; both C# and Java are "Pure" object-oriented languages; formal 
exception handling; built-in thread and synchronization support. 
**************************************************************************************************
C++ is a general-purpose programming language. It has imperative, object-oriented and generic 
programming features, while also providing the facilities for low-level memory manipulation. It is
designed with a bias toward system programming (e.g., for use in embedded systems or operating 
system kernels), with performance, efficiency and flexibility of use as its design requirements.
**************************************************************************************************
JavaScript is a dynamic computer programming language. It is most commonly used as part of web 
browsers, whose implementations allow client-side scripts to interact with the user, control the 
browser, communicate asynchronously, and alter the document content that is displayed. It is also 
used in server-side network programming with runtime environments such as Node.js, game development
and the creation of desktop and mobile applications. JavaScript is classified as a prototype-based
scripting language with dynamic typing and first-class functions. This mix of features makes it a 
multi-paradigm language, supporting object-oriented, imperative, and functional programming styles.
***************************************************************************************************
C is a general-purpose, imperative computer programming language. It supports structured 
programming, lexical variable scope and recursion, while a static type system prevents many 
unintended operations. By design, C provides constructs that map efficiently to typical machine 
instructions, and therefore it has found lasting use in applications that had formerly been coded 
in assembly language, including operating systems as well as various application software for 
computers ranging from supercomputers to embedded systems.
**************************************************************************************************
Python is a widely used general-purpose, high-level programming language. Its design philosophy 
emphasizes code readability, and its syntax allows programmers to express concepts in fewer lines 
of code than would be possible in languages such as C++ or Java. The language provides constructs 
intended to enable clear programs on both a small and large scale. Python supports multiple 
programming paradigms, including object-oriented, imperative and functional programming or 
procedural styles. It features a dynamic type system and automatic memory management and has a 
large and comprehensive standard library.